Gel Electrophoresis
Because nucleic acids are negatively charged ions at neutral or alkaline pH in an aqueous environment, they can be
moved by an electric field. Gel electrophoresis is a technique used to separate charged molecules on the basis of
size and charge. The nucleic acids can be separated as whole chromosomes or as fragments. The nucleic acids are
loaded into a slot at one end of a gel matrix, an electric current is applied, and negatively charged molecules are
pulled toward the opposite end of the gel (the end with the positive electrode). Smaller molecules move through the
pores in the gel faster than larger molecules; this difference in the rate of migration separates the fragments on the
basis of size. The nucleic acids in a gel matrix are invisible until they are stained with a compound that allows them
to be seen, such as a dye. Distinct fragments of nucleic acids appear as bands at specific distances from the top of
the gel (the negative electrode end) that are based on their size (Figure 10.3). A mixture of many fragments of
varying sizes appear as a long smear, whereas uncut genomic DNA is usually too large to run through the gel and
forms a single large band at the top of the gel.
FIGURE 10.3 Shown are DNA fragments from six samples run on a gel, stained with a fluorescent dye and viewed under UV light. (credit:
modification of work by James Jacob, Tompkins Cortland Community College)
Polymerase Chain Reaction
DNA analysis often requires focusing on one or more specific regions of the genome. It also frequently involves
situations in which only one or a few copies of a DNA molecule are available for further analysis. These amounts are
insufficient for most procedures, such as gel electrophoresis. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique used
to rapidly increase the number of copies of specific regions of DNA for further analyses (Figure 10.4). PCR uses a
special form of DNA polymerase, the enzyme that replicates DNA, and other short nucleotide sequences called
primers that base pair to a specific portion of the DNA being replicated. PCR is used for many purposes in
laboratories. These include: 1) the identification of the owner of a DNA sample left at a crime scene; 2) paternity
analysis; 3) the comparison of small amounts of ancient DNA with modern organisms; and 4) determining the
sequence of nucleotides in a specific region.
10.1 • Cloning and Genetic Engineering
225
