advances in biotechnology have made it possible to reproductively clone mammals in the laboratory.
Natural sexual reproduction involves the union, during fertilization, of a sperm and an egg. Each of these gametes is
haploid, meaning they contain one set of chromosomes in their nuclei. The resulting cell, or zygote, is then diploid
and contains two sets of chromosomes. This cell divides mitotically to produce a multicellular organism. However,
the union of just any two cells cannot produce a viable zygote; there are components in the cytoplasm of the egg cell
that are essential for the early development of the embryo during its first few cell divisions. Without these
provisions, there would be no subsequent development. Therefore, to produce a new individual, both a diploid
genetic complement and an egg cytoplasm are required. The approach to producing an artificially cloned individual
is to take the egg cell of one individual and to remove the haploid nucleus. Then a diploid nucleus from a body cell of
a second individual, the donor, is put into the egg cell. The egg is then stimulated to divide so that development
proceeds. This sounds simple, but in fact it takes many attempts before each of the steps is completed successfully.
The first cloned agricultural animal was Dolly, a sheep who was born in 1996. The success rate of reproductive
cloning at the time was very low. Dolly lived for six years and died of a lung tumor (Figure 10.7). There was
speculation that because the cell DNA that gave rise to Dolly came from an older individual, the age of the DNA may
have affected her life expectancy. Since Dolly, several species of animals (such as horses, bulls, and goats) have
been successfully cloned.
There have been attempts at producing cloned human embryos as sources of embryonic stem cells. In the
procedure, the DNA from an adult human is introduced into a human egg cell, which is then stimulated to divide. The
technology is similar to the technology that was used to produce Dolly, but the embryo is never implanted into a
surrogate carrier. The cells produced are called embryonic stem cells because they have the capacity to develop into
many different kinds of cells, such as muscle or nerve cells. The stem cells could be used to research and ultimately
provide therapeutic applications, such as replacing damaged tissues. The benefit of cloning in this instance is that
the cells used to regenerate new tissues would be a perfect match to the donor of the original DNA. For example, a
leukemia patient would not require a sibling with a tissue match for a bone-marrow transplant. Freda Miller and
Elaine Fuchs, working independently, discovered stem cells in different layers of the skin. These cells help the skin
repair itself, and their discovery may have applications in treatments of skin disease and potentially other
conditions, such as nerve damage.
10.1 • Cloning and Genetic Engineering
229
