10.2 Biotechnology in Medicine and Agriculture
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe uses of biotechnology in medicine
•
Describe uses of biotechnology in agriculture
It is easy to see how biotechnology can be used for medicinal purposes. Knowledge of the genetic makeup of our
species, the genetic basis of heritable diseases, and the invention of technology to manipulate and fix mutant genes
provides methods to treat diseases. Biotechnology in agriculture can enhance resistance to disease, pests, and
environmental stress to improve both crop yield and quality.
Genetic Diagnosis and Gene Therapy
The process of testing for suspected genetic defects before administering treatment is called genetic diagnosis by
genetic testing. In some cases in which a genetic disease is present in an individual’s family, family members may
be advised to undergo genetic testing. For example, mutations in the BRCA genes may increase the likelihood of
developing breast, ovarian, and some other cancers. A person with breast cancer can be screened for these
mutations. If one of the high-risk mutations is found, relatives may also wish to be screened for that particular
mutation, or simply be more vigilant for the occurrence of cancers. Genetic testing is also offered for fetuses (or
embryos with in vitro fertilization) to determine the presence or absence of disease-causing genes in families with
specific debilitating diseases.
LINK TO LEARNING
See how human DNA is extracted (http://openstax.org/l/DNA_extraction) for uses such as genetic testing.
Gene therapy is a genetic engineering technique that may one day be used to cure certain genetic diseases. In its
simplest form, it involves the introduction of a non-mutated gene at a random location in the genome to cure a
disease by replacing a protein that may be absent in these individuals because of a genetic mutation. The non-
mutated gene is usually introduced into diseased cells as part of a vector transmitted by a virus, such as an
adenovirus, that can infect the host cell and deliver the foreign DNA into the genome of the targeted cell (Figure
10.8). To date, gene therapies have been primarily experimental procedures in humans. A few of these experimental
treatments have been successful, but the methods may be important in the future as the factors limiting its success
are resolved.
10.2 • Biotechnology in Medicine and Agriculture
231
