FIGURE 9.9 The semiconservative model of DNA replication is shown. Gray indicates the original DNA strands, and blue indicates newly
synthesized DNA.
During DNA replication, each of the two strands that make up the double helix serves as a template from which new
strands are copied. The new strand will be complementary to the parental or “old” strand. Each new double strand
consists of one parental strand and one new daughter strand. This is known as semiconservative replication. When
two DNA copies are formed, they have an identical sequence of nucleotide bases and are divided equally into two
daughter cells.
DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
Because eukaryotic genomes are very complex, DNA replication is a very complicated process that involves several
enzymes and other proteins. It occurs in three main stages: initiation, elongation, and termination.
Recall that eukaryotic DNA is bound to proteins known as histones to form structures called nucleosomes. During
initiation, the DNA is made accessible to the proteins and enzymes involved in the replication process. How does the
replication machinery know where on the DNA double helix to begin? It turns out that there are specific nucleotide
sequences called origins of replication at which replication begins. Certain proteins bind to the origin of replication
while an enzyme called helicase unwinds and opens up the DNA helix. As the DNA opens up, Y-shaped structures
called replication forks are formed (Figure 9.10). Two replication forks are formed at the origin of replication, and
these get extended in both directions as replication proceeds. There are multiple origins of replication on the
eukaryotic chromosome, such that replication can occur simultaneously from several places in the genome.
During elongation, an enzyme called DNA polymerase adds DNA nucleotides to the 3' end of the template. Because
DNA polymerase can only add new nucleotides at the end of a backbone, a primer sequence, which provides this
starting point, is added with complementary RNA nucleotides. This primer is removed later, and the nucleotides are
replaced with DNA nucleotides. One strand, which is complementary to the parental DNA strand, is synthesized
continuously toward the replication fork so the polymerase can add nucleotides in this direction. This continuously
synthesized strand is known as the leading strand. Because DNA polymerase can only synthesize DNA in a 5' to 3'
direction, the other new strand is put together in short pieces called Okazaki fragments. The Okazaki fragments
each require a primer made of RNA to start the synthesis. The strand with the Okazaki fragments is known as the
lagging strand. As synthesis proceeds, an enzyme removes the RNA primer, which is then replaced with DNA
nucleotides, and the gaps between fragments are sealed by an enzyme called DNA ligase.
The process of DNA replication can be summarized as follows:
204
9 • Molecular Biology
Access for free at openstax.org
