FIGURE 10.16 Transgenic agricultural plants can be made to resist disease. These transgenic plums are resistant to the plum pox virus.
(credit: Scott Bauer, USDA ARS)
Proteomics
Proteins are the final products of genes that perform the function encoded by the gene. Proteins are composed of
amino acids and play important roles in the cell. All enzymes (except ribozymes) are proteins and act as catalysts
that affect the rate of reactions. Proteins are also regulatory molecules, and some are hormones. Transport proteins,
such as hemoglobin, help transport oxygen to various organs. Antibodies that defend against foreign particles are
also proteins. In the diseased state, protein function can be impaired because of changes at the genetic level or
because of direct impact on a specific protein.
A proteome is the entire set of proteins produced by a cell type. Proteomes can be studied using the knowledge of
genomes because genes code for mRNAs, and the mRNAs encode proteins. The study of the function of proteomes
is called proteomics. Proteomics complements genomics and is useful when scientists want to test their
hypotheses that were based on genes. Even though all cells in a multicellular organism have the same set of genes,
the set of proteins produced in different tissues is different and dependent on gene expression. Thus, the genome is
constant, but the proteome varies and is dynamic within an organism. In addition, RNAs can be alternatively spliced
(cut and pasted to create novel combinations and novel proteins), and many proteins are modified after translation.
Although the genome provides a blueprint, the final architecture depends on several factors that can change the
progression of events that generate the proteome.
Genomes and proteomes of patients suffering from specific diseases are being studied to understand the genetic
basis of the disease. The most prominent disease being studied with proteomic approaches is cancer (Figure 10.17).
Proteomic approaches are being used to improve the screening and early detection of cancer; this is achieved by
identifying proteins whose expression is affected by the disease process. An individual protein is called a
biomarker, whereas a set of proteins with altered expression levels is called a protein signature. For a biomarker or
protein signature to be useful as a candidate for early screening and detection of a cancer, it must be secreted in
body fluids such as sweat, blood, or urine, so that large-scale screenings can be performed in a noninvasive fashion.
The current problem with using biomarkers for the early detection of cancer is the high rate of false-negative results.
A false-negative result is a negative test result that should have been positive. In other words, many cases of cancer
go undetected, which makes biomarkers unreliable. Some examples of protein biomarkers used in cancer detection
are CA-125 for ovarian cancer and PSA for prostate cancer. Protein signatures may be more reliable than biomarkers
to detect cancer cells. Proteomics is also being used to develop individualized treatment plans, which involves the
prediction of whether or not an individual will respond to specific drugs and the side effects that the individual may
have. Proteomics is also being used to predict the possibility of disease recurrence.
10.3 • Genomics and Proteomics
241
