FIGURE 9.3 (a) Each DNA nucleotide is made up of a sugar, a phosphate group, and a base. (b) Cytosine and thymine are pyrimidines.
Guanine and adenine are purines.
The phosphate group of one nucleotide bonds covalently with the sugar molecule of the next nucleotide, and so on,
forming a long polymer of nucleotide monomers. The sugar–phosphate groups line up in a “backbone” for each
single strand of DNA, and the nucleotide bases stick out from this backbone. The carbon atoms of the five-carbon
sugar are numbered clockwise from the oxygen as 1', 2', 3', 4', and 5' (1' is read as “one prime”). The phosphate
group is attached to the 5' carbon of one nucleotide and the 3' carbon of the next nucleotide. In its natural state,
each DNA molecule is actually composed of two single strands held together along their length with hydrogen bonds
between the bases.
Watson and Crick proposed that the DNA is made up of two strands that are twisted around each other to form a
right-handed helix, called a double helix. Base-pairing takes place between a purine and pyrimidine: namely, A
pairs with T, and G pairs with C. In other words, adenine and thymine are complementary base pairs, and cytosine
and guanine are also complementary base pairs. This is the basis for Chargaff’s rule; because of their
complementarity, there is as much adenine as thymine in a DNA molecule and as much guanine as cytosine.
Adenine and thymine are connected by two hydrogen bonds, and cytosine and guanine are connected by three
hydrogen bonds. The two strands are anti-parallel in nature; that is, one strand will have the 3' carbon of the sugar in
the “upward” position, whereas the other strand will have the 5' carbon in the upward position. The diameter of the
DNA double helix is uniform throughout because a purine (two rings) always pairs with a pyrimidine (one ring) and
their combined lengths are always equal. (Figure 9.4).
FIGURE 9.4 DNA (a) forms a double stranded helix, and (b) adenine pairs with thymine and cytosine pairs with guanine. (credit a:
modification of work by Jerome Walker, Dennis Myts)
The Structure of RNA
There is a second nucleic acid in all cells called ribonucleic acid, or RNA. Like DNA, RNA is a polymer of nucleotides.
Each of the nucleotides in RNA is made up of a nitrogenous base, a five-carbon sugar, and a phosphate group. In the
case of RNA, the five-carbon sugar is ribose, not deoxyribose. Ribose has a hydroxyl group at the 2' carbon, unlike
200
9 • Molecular Biology
Access for free at openstax.org
