deoxyribose, which has only a hydrogen atom (Figure 9.5).
FIGURE 9.5 The difference between the ribose found in RNA and the deoxyribose found in DNA is that ribose has a hydroxyl group at the 2'
carbon.
RNA nucleotides contain the nitrogenous bases adenine, cytosine, and guanine. However, they do not contain
thymine, which is instead replaced by uracil, symbolized by a “U.” RNA exists as a single-stranded molecule rather
than a double-stranded helix. Molecular biologists have named several kinds of RNA on the basis of their function.
These include messenger RNA (mRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), and ribosomal RNA (rRNA)—molecules that are
involved in the production of proteins from the DNA code.
How DNA Is Arranged in the Cell
DNA is a working molecule; it must be replicated when a cell is ready to divide, and it must be “read” to produce the
molecules, such as proteins, to carry out the functions of the cell. For this reason, the DNA is protected and
packaged in very specific ways. In addition, DNA molecules can be very long. Stretched end-to-end, the DNA
molecules in a single human cell would come to a length of about 2 meters. Thus, the DNA for a cell must be
packaged in a very ordered way to fit and function within a structure (the cell) that is not visible to the naked eye.
The chromosomes of prokaryotes are much simpler than those of eukaryotes in many of their features (Figure 9.6).
Most prokaryotes contain a single, circular chromosome that is found in an area in the cytoplasm called the
nucleoid.
FIGURE 9.6 A eukaryote contains a well-defined nucleus, whereas in prokaryotes, the chromosome lies in the cytoplasm in an area called
the nucleoid.
The size of the genome in one of the most well-studied prokaryotes, Escherichia coli, is 4.6 million base pairs, which
would extend a distance of about 1.6 mm if stretched out. So how does this fit inside a small bacterial cell? The DNA
is twisted beyond the double helix in what is known as supercoiling. Some proteins are known to be involved in the
supercoiling; other proteins and enzymes help in maintaining the supercoiled structure.
Eukaryotes, whose chromosomes each consist of a linear DNA molecule, employ a different type of packing strategy
to fit their DNA inside the nucleus (Figure 9.7). Before the structure of DNA was even uncovered, Marie Maynard
Daly and Arthur E. Mirsky conducted extensive research in the 1940s and 1950s to understand the molecules and
structures in involved. At the most basic level, DNA is wrapped around proteins known as histones to form
structures called nucleosomes. The DNA is wrapped tightly around the histone core. This nucleosome is linked to
the next one by a short strand of DNA that is free of histones. This is also known as the “beads on a string”
9.1 • The Structure of DNA
201
