1.
DNA unwinds at the origin of replication.
2.
New bases are added to the complementary parental strands. One new strand is made continuously, while the
other strand is made in pieces.
3.
Primers are removed, new DNA nucleotides are put in place of the primers and the backbone is sealed by DNA
ligase.
VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 9.10 A replication fork is formed by the opening of the origin of replication, and helicase separates the DNA strands. An RNA primer
is synthesized, and is elongated by the DNA polymerase. On the leading strand, DNA is synthesized continuously, whereas on the lagging
strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches. The DNA fragments are joined by DNA ligase (not shown).
You isolate a cell strain in which the joining together of Okazaki fragments is impaired and suspect that a mutation
has occurred in an enzyme found at the replication fork. Which enzyme is most likely to be mutated?
Telomere Replication
Because eukaryotic chromosomes are linear, DNA replication comes to the end of a line in eukaryotic chromosomes.
As you have learned, the DNA polymerase enzyme can add nucleotides in only one direction. In the leading strand,
synthesis continues until the end of the chromosome is reached; however, on the lagging strand there is no place for
a primer to be made for the DNA fragment to be copied at the end of the chromosome. This presents a problem for
the cell because the ends remain unpaired, and over time these ends get progressively shorter as cells continue to
divide. The ends of the linear chromosomes are known as telomeres, which have repetitive sequences that do not
code for a particular gene. As a consequence, it is telomeres that are shortened with each round of DNA replication
instead of genes. For example, in humans, a six base-pair sequence, TTAGGG, is repeated 100 to 1000 times. The
discovery of the enzyme telomerase (Figure 9.11) helped in the understanding of how chromosome ends are
maintained. The telomerase attaches to the end of the chromosome, and complementary bases to the RNA
template are added on the end of the DNA strand. Once the lagging strand template is sufficiently elongated, DNA
polymerase can now add nucleotides that are complementary to the ends of the chromosomes. Thus, the ends of
the chromosomes are replicated.
9.2 • DNA Replication
205
