Mitochondrial Genomics
Mitochondria are intracellular organelles that contain their own DNA. Mitochondrial DNA mutates at a rapid rate and
is often used to study evolutionary relationships. Another feature that makes studying the mitochondrial genome
interesting is that in most multicellular organisms, the mitochondrial DNA is passed on from the mother during the
process of fertilization. For this reason, mitochondrial genomics is often used to trace genealogy.
Genomics in Forensic Analysis
Information and clues obtained from DNA samples found at crime scenes have been used as evidence in court
cases, and genetic markers have been used in forensic analysis. Genomic analysis has also become useful in this
field. In 2001, the first use of genomics in forensics was published. It was a collaborative effort between academic
research institutions and the FBI to solve the mysterious cases of anthrax (Figure 10.15) that was transported by
the US Postal Service. Anthrax bacteria were made into an infectious powder and mailed to news media and two
U.S. Senators. The powder infected the administrative staff and postal workers who opened or handled the letters.
Five people died, and 17 were sickened from the bacteria. Using microbial genomics, researchers determined that a
specific strain of anthrax was used in all the mailings; eventually, the source was traced to a scientist at a national
biodefense laboratory in Maryland.
FIGURE 10.15 Bacillus anthracis is the organism that causes anthrax. (credit: modification of work by CDC; scale-bar data from Matt
Russell)
Genomics in Agriculture
Genomics can reduce the trials and failures involved in scientific research to a certain extent, which could improve
the quality and quantity of crop yields in agriculture (Figure 10.16). Linking traits to genes or gene signatures helps
to improve crop breeding to generate hybrids with the most desirable qualities. Scientists use genomic data to
identify desirable traits, and then transfer those traits to a different organism to create a new genetically modified
organism, as described in the previous module. Scientists are discovering how genomics can improve the quality
and quantity of agricultural production. For example, scientists could use desirable traits to create a useful product
or enhance an existing product, such as making a drought-sensitive crop more tolerant of the dry season.
240
10 • Biotechnology
Access for free at openstax.org
