The Genetic Code
To summarize what we know to this point, the cellular process of transcription generates messenger RNA (mRNA), a
mobile molecular copy of one or more genes with an alphabet of A, C, G, and uracil (U). Translation of the mRNA
template converts nucleotide-based genetic information into a protein product. Protein sequences consist of 20
commonly occurring amino acids; therefore, it can be said that the protein alphabet consists of 20 letters. Each
amino acid is defined by a three-nucleotide sequence called the triplet codon. The relationship between a
nucleotide codon and its corresponding amino acid is called the genetic code.
Given the different numbers of “letters” in the mRNA and protein “alphabets,” combinations of nucleotides
corresponded to single amino acids. Using a three-nucleotide code means that there are a total of 64 (4 × 4 × 4)
possible combinations; therefore, a given amino acid is encoded by more than one nucleotide triplet (Figure 9.20).
FIGURE 9.20 This figure shows the genetic code for translating each nucleotide triplet, or codon, in mRNA into an amino acid or a
termination signal in a nascent protein. (credit: modification of work by NIH)
Three of the 64 codons terminate protein synthesis and release the polypeptide from the translation machinery.
These triplets are called stop codons. Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In addition to specifying the
amino acid methionine, it also serves as the start codon to initiate translation. The reading frame for translation is
set by the AUG start codon near the 5' end of the mRNA. The genetic code is universal. With a few exceptions,
virtually all species use the same genetic code for protein synthesis, which is powerful evidence that all life on Earth
shares a common origin.
The Mechanism of Protein Synthesis
Just as with mRNA synthesis, protein synthesis can be divided into three phases: initiation, elongation, and
termination. The process of translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we will explore how
translation occurs in E. coli, a representative prokaryote, and specify any differences between prokaryotic and
eukaryotic translation.
Protein synthesis begins with the formation of an initiation complex. In E. coli, this complex involves the small
ribosome subunit, the mRNA template, three initiation factors, and a special initiator tRNA. The initiator tRNA
interacts with the AUG start codon, and links to a special form of the amino acid methionine that is typically
removed from the polypeptide after translation is complete.
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of polypeptide elongation are the same, so we will review elongation from
the perspective of E. coli. The large ribosomal subunit of E. coli consists of three compartments: the A site binds
incoming charged tRNAs (tRNAs with their attached specific amino acids). The P site binds charged tRNAs carrying
amino acids that have formed bonds with the growing polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociated from their
corresponding tRNA. The E site releases dissociated tRNAs so they can be recharged with free amino acids. The
9.4 • Translation
213
