similarities in the DNA replication process, these structural differences necessitate some differences in the DNA
replication process in these two life forms.
DNA replication has been extremely well-studied in prokaryotes, primarily because of the small size of the genome
and large number of variants available. Escherichia coli has 4.6 million base pairs in a single circular chromosome,
and all of it gets replicated in approximately 42 minutes, starting from a single origin of replication and proceeding
around the chromosome in both directions. This means that approximately 1000 nucleotides are added per second.
The process is much more rapid than in eukaryotes. Table 9.1 summarizes the differences between prokaryotic and
eukaryotic replications.
Differences between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Replications
Property
Prokaryotes
Eukaryotes
Origin of replication
Single
Multiple
Rate of replication
1000 nucleotides/s
50 to 100 nucleotides/s
Chromosome structure
circular
linear
Telomerase
Not present
Present
TABLE 9.1
LINK TO LEARNING
Click through a tutorial (http://openstax.org/l/DNA_replicatio2) on DNA replication.
DNA Repair
DNA polymerase can make mistakes while adding nucleotides. It edits the DNA by proofreading every newly added
base. Incorrect bases are removed and replaced by the correct base, and then polymerization continues (Figure
9.13a). Most mistakes are corrected during replication, although when this does not happen, the mismatch repair
mechanism is employed. Mismatch repair enzymes recognize the wrongly incorporated base and excise it from the
DNA, replacing it with the correct base (Figure 9.13b). In yet another type of repair, nucleotide excision repair, the
DNA double strand is unwound and separated, the incorrect bases are removed along with a few bases on the 5' and
3' end, and these are replaced by copying the template with the help of DNA polymerase (Figure 9.13c). Nucleotide
excision repair is particularly important in correcting thymine dimers, which are primarily caused by ultraviolet light.
In a thymine dimer, two thymine nucleotides adjacent to each other on one strand are covalently bonded to each
other rather than their complementary bases. If the dimer is not removed and repaired it will lead to a mutation.
Individuals with flaws in their nucleotide excision repair genes show extreme sensitivity to sunlight and develop skin
cancers early in life.
9.2 • DNA Replication
207
