complementary mRNA molecule
transcription bubble
the region of locally unwound
DNA that allows for transcription of mRNA
tRNA
transfer RNA; an RNA molecule that contains a
specific three-nucleotide anticodon sequence to
pair with the mRNA codon and also binds to a
specific amino acid
Chapter Summary
9.1 The Structure of DNA
The model of the double-helix structure of DNA was
proposed by Watson and Crick. The DNA molecule is a
polymer of nucleotides. Each nucleotide is composed
of a nitrogenous base, a five-carbon sugar
(deoxyribose), and a phosphate group. There are four
nitrogenous bases in DNA, two purines (adenine and
guanine) and two pyrimidines (cytosine and thymine).
A DNA molecule is composed of two strands. Each
strand is composed of nucleotides bonded together
covalently between the phosphate group of one and
the deoxyribose sugar of the next. From this backbone
extend the bases. The bases of one strand bond to the
bases of the second strand with hydrogen bonds.
Adenine always bonds with thymine, and cytosine
always bonds with guanine. The bonding causes the
two strands to spiral around each other in a shape
called a double helix. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) is a
second nucleic acid found in cells. RNA is a single-
stranded polymer of nucleotides. It also differs from
DNA in that it contains the sugar ribose, rather than
deoxyribose, and the nucleotide uracil rather than
thymine. Various RNA molecules function in the
process of forming proteins from the genetic code in
DNA.
Prokaryotes contain a single, double-stranded circular
chromosome. Eukaryotes contain double-stranded
linear DNA molecules packaged into chromosomes.
The DNA helix is wrapped around proteins to form
nucleosomes. The protein coils are further coiled, and
during mitosis and meiosis, the chromosomes become
even more greatly coiled to facilitate their movement.
Chromosomes have two distinct regions which can be
distinguished by staining, reflecting different degrees
of packaging and determined by whether the DNA in a
region is being expressed (euchromatin) or not
(heterochromatin).
9.2 DNA Replication
DNA replicates by a semi-conservative method in
which each of the two parental DNA strands act as a
template for new DNA to be synthesized. After
replication, each DNA has one parental or “old” strand,
and one daughter or “new” strand.
Replication in eukaryotes starts at multiple origins of
replication, while replication in prokaryotes starts from
a single origin of replication. The DNA is opened with
enzymes, resulting in the formation of the replication
fork. Primase synthesizes an RNA primer to initiate
synthesis by DNA polymerase, which can add
nucleotides in only one direction. One strand is
synthesized continuously in the direction of the
replication fork; this is called the leading strand. The
other strand is synthesized in a direction away from the
replication fork, in short stretches of DNA known as
Okazaki fragments. This strand is known as the lagging
strand. Once replication is completed, the RNA primers
are replaced by DNA nucleotides and the DNA is sealed
with DNA ligase.
The ends of eukaryotic chromosomes pose a problem,
as polymerase is unable to extend them without a
primer. Telomerase, an enzyme with an inbuilt RNA
template, extends the ends by copying the RNA
template and extending one end of the chromosome.
DNA polymerase can then extend the DNA using the
primer. In this way, the ends of the chromosomes are
protected. Cells have mechanisms for repairing DNA
when it becomes damaged or errors are made in
replication. These mechanisms include mismatch
repair to replace nucleotides that are paired with a
non-complementary base and nucleotide excision
repair, which removes bases that are damaged such as
thymine dimers.
9.3 Transcription
In prokaryotes, mRNA synthesis is initiated at a
promoter sequence on the DNA template. Elongation
synthesizes new mRNA. Termination liberates the
mRNA and occurs by mechanisms that stall the RNA
polymerase and cause it to fall off the DNA template.
Newly transcribed eukaryotic mRNAs are modified with
a cap and a poly-A tail. These structures protect the
mature mRNA from degradation and help export it from
the nucleus. Eukaryotic mRNAs also undergo splicing,
in which introns are removed and exons are
reconnected with single-nucleotide accuracy. Only
finished mRNAs are exported from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm.
9.4 Translation
The central dogma describes the flow of genetic
information in the cell from genes to mRNA to proteins.
Genes are used to make mRNA by the process of
220
9 • Chapter Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
