VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 10.7 Dolly the sheep was the first agricultural animal to be cloned. To create Dolly, the nucleus was removed from a donor egg cell.
The enucleated egg was placed next to the other cell, then they were shocked to fuse. They were shocked again to start division. The cells
were allowed to divide for several days until an early embryonic stage was reached, before being implanted in a surrogate mother.
Why was Dolly a Finn-Dorset and not a Scottish Blackface sheep?
Genetic Engineering
Using recombinant DNA technology to modify an organism’s DNA to achieve desirable traits is called genetic
engineering. Addition of foreign DNA in the form of recombinant DNA vectors that are generated by molecular
cloning is the most common method of genetic engineering. An organism that receives the recombinant DNA is
called a genetically modified organism (GMO). If the foreign DNA that is introduced comes from a different species,
the host organism is called transgenic. Bacteria, plants, and animals have been genetically modified since the early
1970s for academic, medical, agricultural, and industrial purposes. These applications will be examined in more
detail in the next module.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this short video (http://openstax.org/l/transgenic) explaining how scientists create a transgenic animal.
Although the classic methods of studying the function of genes began with a given phenotype and determined the
genetic basis of that phenotype, modern techniques allow researchers to start at the DNA sequence level and ask:
"What does this gene or DNA element do?" This technique, called reverse genetics, has resulted in reversing the
classical genetic methodology. One example of this method is analogous to damaging a body part to determine its
function. An insect that loses a wing cannot fly, which means that the wing’s function is flight. The classic genetic
method compares insects that cannot fly with insects that can fly, and observes that the non-flying insects have lost
wings. Similarly in a reverse genetics approach, mutating or deleting genes provides researchers with clues about
gene function. Alternately, reverse genetics can be used to cause a gene to overexpress itself to determine what
phenotypic effects may occur.
230
10 • Biotechnology
Access for free at openstax.org
