"vehicle" in which to insert a desired DNA fragment. Modified plasmids are usually reintroduced into a bacterial host
for replication. As the bacteria divide, they copy their own DNA (including the plasmids). The inserted DNA fragment
is copied along with the rest of the bacterial DNA. In a bacterial cell, the fragment of DNA from the human genome
(or another organism that is being studied) is referred to as foreign DNA to differentiate it from the DNA of the
bacterium (the host DNA).
Plasmids occur naturally in bacterial populations (such as Escherichia coli) and have genes that can contribute
favorable traits to the organism, such as antibiotic resistance (the ability to be unaffected by antibiotics). Plasmids
have been highly engineered as vectors for molecular cloning and for the subsequent large-scale production of
important molecules, such as insulin. A valuable characteristic of plasmid vectors is the ease with which a foreign
DNA fragment can be introduced. These plasmid vectors contain many short DNA sequences that can be cut with
different commonly available restriction enzymes. Restriction enzymes (also called restriction endonucleases)
recognize specific DNA sequences and cut them in a predictable manner; they are naturally produced by bacteria as
a defense mechanism against foreign DNA. Many restriction enzymes make staggered cuts in the two strands of
DNA, such that the cut ends have a 2- to 4-nucleotide single-stranded overhang. The sequence that is recognized by
the restriction enzyme is a four- to eight-nucleotide sequence that is a palindrome. Like with a word palindrome, this
means the sequence reads the same forward and backward. In most cases, the sequence reads the same forward
on one strand and backward on the complementary strand. When a staggered cut is made in a sequence like this,
the overhangs are complementary (Figure 10.5).
FIGURE 10.5 In this (a) six-nucleotide restriction enzyme recognition site, notice that the sequence of six nucleotides reads the same in the
5' to 3' direction on one strand as it does in the 5' to 3' direction on the complementary strand. This is known as a palindrome. (b) The
restriction enzyme makes breaks in the DNA strands, and (c) the cut in the DNA results in “sticky ends”. Another piece of DNA cut on either
end by the same restriction enzyme could attach to these sticky ends and be inserted into the gap made by this cut.
Because these overhangs are capable of coming back together by hydrogen bonding with complementary overhangs
on a piece of DNA cut with the same restriction enzyme, these are called “sticky ends.” The process of forming
hydrogen bonds between complementary sequences on single strands to form double-stranded DNA is called
annealing. Addition of an enzyme called DNA ligase, which takes part in DNA replication in cells, permanently joins
the DNA fragments when the sticky ends come together. In this way, any DNA fragment can be spliced between the
two ends of a plasmid DNA that has been cut with the same restriction enzyme (Figure 10.6).
10.1 • Cloning and Genetic Engineering
227
