Because foreign genes can spread to other species in the environment, particularly in the pollen and seeds of plants,
extensive testing is required to ensure ecological stability. Staples like corn, potatoes, and tomatoes were the first
crop plants to be genetically engineered.
Transformation of Plants Using Agrobacterium tumefaciens
In plants, tumors caused by the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens occur by transfer of DNA from the bacterium
to the plant. The artificial introduction of DNA into plant cells is more challenging than in animal cells because of the
thick plant cell wall. Researchers used the natural transfer of DNA from Agrobacterium to a plant host to introduce
DNA fragments of their choice into plant hosts. In nature, the disease-causing A. tumefaciens have a set of plasmids
that contain genes that integrate into the infected plant cell’s genome. Researchers manipulate the plasmids to
carry the desired DNA fragment and insert it into the plant genome.
The Organic Insecticide Bacillus thuringiensis
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a bacterium that produces protein crystals that are toxic to many insect species that
feed on plants. Insects that have eaten Bt toxin stop feeding on the plants within a few hours. After the toxin is
activated in the intestines of the insects, death occurs within a couple of days. The crystal toxin genes have been
cloned from the bacterium and introduced into plants, therefore allowing plants to produce their own crystal Bt
toxin that acts against insects. Bt toxin is safe for the environment and non-toxic to mammals (including humans).
As a result, it has been approved for use by organic farmers as a natural insecticide. There is some concern,
however, that insects may evolve resistance to the Bt toxin in the same way that bacteria evolve resistance to
antibiotics.
FlavrSavr Tomato
The first GM crop to be introduced into the market was the FlavrSavr Tomato produced in 1994. Molecular genetic
technology was used to slow down the process of softening and rotting caused by fungal infections, which led to
increased shelf life of the GM tomatoes. Additional genetic modification improved the flavor of this tomato. The
FlavrSavr tomato did not successfully stay in the market because of problems maintaining and shipping the crop.
10.3 Genomics and Proteomics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Define genomics and proteomics
•
Define whole genome sequencing
•
Explain different applications of genomics and proteomics
The study of nucleic acids began with the discovery of DNA, progressed to the study of genes and small fragments,
and has now exploded to the field of genomics. Genomics is the study of entire genomes, including the complete set
of genes, their nucleotide sequence and organization, and their interactions within a species and with other species.
The advances in genomics have been made possible by DNA sequencing technology. Just as information technology
has led to Google Maps that enable us to get detailed information about locations around the globe, genomic
information is used to create similar maps of the DNA of different organisms.
Mapping Genomes
Genome mapping is the process of finding the location of genes on each chromosome. The maps that are created
are comparable to the maps that we use to navigate streets. A genetic map is an illustration that lists genes and
their location on a chromosome. Genetic maps provide the big picture (similar to a map of interstate highways) and
use genetic markers (similar to landmarks). A genetic marker is a gene or sequence on a chromosome that shows
genetic linkage with a trait of interest. The genetic marker tends to be inherited with the gene of interest, and one
measure of distance between them is the recombination frequency during meiosis. Early geneticists called this
linkage analysis.
Physical maps get into the intimate details of smaller regions of the chromosomes (similar to a detailed road map)
(Figure 10.11). A physical map is a representation of the physical distance, in nucleotides, between genes or genetic
markers. Both genetic linkage maps and physical maps are required to build a complete picture of the genome.
Having a complete map of the genome makes it easier for researchers to study individual genes. Human genome
234
10 • Biotechnology
Access for free at openstax.org
