several million SNPs identified, but identifying them in other individuals who have not had their complete genome
sequenced is much easier because only the marker SNPs need to be identified.
In a common design for a GWAS, two groups of individuals are chosen; one group has the disease, and the other
group does not. The individuals in each group are matched in other characteristics to reduce the effect of
confounding variables causing differences between the two groups. For example, the genotypes may differ because
the two groups are mostly taken from different parts of the world. Once the individuals are chosen, and typically
their numbers are a thousand or more for the study to work, samples of their DNA are obtained. The DNA is analyzed
using automated systems to identify large differences in the percentage of particular SNPs between the two groups.
Often the study examines a million or more SNPs in the DNA. The results of GWAS can be used in two ways: the
genetic differences may be used as markers for susceptibility to the disease in undiagnosed individuals, and the
particular genes identified can be targets for research into the molecular pathway of the disease and potential
therapies. An offshoot of the discovery of gene associations with disease has been the formation of companies that
provide so-called “personal genomics” that will identify risk levels for various diseases based on an individual’s SNP
complement. The science behind these services is controversial.
Because GWAS looks for associations between genes and disease, these studies provide data for other research into
causes, rather than answering specific questions themselves. An association between a gene difference and a
disease does not necessarily mean there is a cause-and-effect relationship. However, some studies have provided
useful information about the genetic causes of diseases. For example, three different studies in 2005 identified a
gene for a protein involved in regulating inflammation in the body that is associated with a disease-causing
blindness called age-related macular degeneration. This opened up new possibilities for research into the cause of
this disease. A large number of genes have been identified to be associated with Crohn’s disease using GWAS, and
some of these have suggested new hypothetical mechanisms for the cause of the disease.
Pharmacogenomics
Pharmacogenomics involves evaluating the effectiveness and safety of drugs on the basis of information from an
individual's genomic sequence. Personal genome sequence information can be used to prescribe medications that
will be most effective and least toxic on the basis of the individual patient’s genotype. Studying changes in gene
expression could provide information about the gene transcription profile in the presence of the drug, which can be
used as an early indicator of the potential for toxic effects. For example, genes involved in cellular growth and
controlled cell death, when disturbed, could lead to the growth of cancerous cells. Genome-wide studies can also
help to find new genes involved in drug toxicity. The gene signatures may not be completely accurate, but can be
tested further before pathologic symptoms arise.
Metagenomics
Traditionally, microbiology has been taught with the view that microorganisms are best studied under pure culture
conditions, which involves isolating a single type of cell and culturing it in the laboratory. Because microorganisms
can go through several generations in a matter of hours, their gene expression profiles adapt to the new laboratory
environment very quickly. On the other hand, many species resist being cultured in isolation. Most microorganisms
do not live as isolated entities, but in microbial communities known as biofilms. For all of these reasons, pure
culture is not always the best way to study microorganisms. Metagenomics is the study of the collective genomes of
multiple species that grow and interact in an environmental niche. Metagenomics can be used to identify new
species more rapidly and to analyze the effect of pollutants on the environment (Figure 10.13). Metagenomics
techniques can now also be applied to communities of higher eukaryotes, such as fish.
238
10 • Biotechnology
Access for free at openstax.org
