FIGURE 9.11 The ends of linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of the telomerase enzyme.
Telomerase is typically found to be active in germ cells, adult stem cells, and some cancer cells. For her discovery of
telomerase and its action, Elizabeth Blackburn (Figure 9.12) received the Nobel Prize for Medicine and Physiology in
2009. Later research using HeLa cells (obtained from Henrietta Lacks) confirmed that telomerase is present in
human cells. And in 2001, researchers including Diane L. Wright found that telomerase is necessary for cells in
human embryos to rapidly proliferate.
FIGURE 9.12 Elizabeth Blackburn, 2009 Nobel Laureate, was the scientist who discovered how telomerase works. (credit: U.S. Embassy,
Stockholm, Sweden)
Telomerase is not active in adult somatic cells. Adult somatic cells that undergo cell division continue to have their
telomeres shortened. This essentially means that telomere shortening is associated with aging. In 2010, scientists
found that telomerase can reverse some age-related conditions in mice, and this may have potential in regenerative
medicine.1 Telomerase-deficient mice were used in these studies; these mice have tissue atrophy, stem-cell
depletion, organ system failure, and impaired tissue injury responses. Telomerase reactivation in these mice caused
extension of telomeres, reduced DNA damage, reversed neurodegeneration, and improved functioning of the testes,
spleen, and intestines. Thus, telomere reactivation may have potential for treating age-related diseases in humans.
DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
Recall that the prokaryotic chromosome is a circular molecule with a less extensive coiling structure than eukaryotic
chromosomes. The eukaryotic chromosome is linear and highly coiled around proteins. While there are many
1 Mariella Jaskelioff, et al., “Telomerase reactivation reverses tissue degeneration in aged telomerase-deficient mice,” Nature, 469
(2011):102–7.
206
9 • Molecular Biology
Access for free at openstax.org
