9.3 Transcription
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the central dogma
•
Explain the main steps of transcription
•
Describe how eukaryotic mRNA is processed
In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the second function of DNA (the first was replication) is to provide the
information needed to construct the proteins necessary so that the cell can perform all of its functions. To do this,
the DNA is “read” or transcribed into an mRNA molecule. The mRNA then provides the code to form a protein by a
process called translation. Through the processes of transcription and translation, a protein is built with a specific
sequence of amino acids that was originally encoded in the DNA. This module discusses the details of transcription.
The Central Dogma: DNA Encodes RNA; RNA Encodes Protein
The flow of genetic information in cells from DNA to mRNA to protein is described by the central dogma (Figure
9.14), which states that genes specify the sequences of mRNAs, which in turn specify the sequences of proteins.
FIGURE 9.14 The central dogma states that DNA encodes RNA, which in turn encodes protein.
The copying of DNA to mRNA is relatively straightforward, with one nucleotide being added to the mRNA strand for
every complementary nucleotide read in the DNA strand. The translation to protein is more complex because groups
of three mRNA nucleotides correspond to one amino acid of the protein sequence. However, as we shall see in the
next module, the translation to protein is still systematic, such that nucleotides 1 to 3 correspond to amino acid 1,
nucleotides 4 to 6 correspond to amino acid 2, and so on.
Transcription: from DNA to mRNA
Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with the important
difference of the membrane-bound nucleus in eukaryotes. With the genes bound in the nucleus, transcription
occurs in the nucleus of the cell and the mRNA transcript must be transported to the cytoplasm. The prokaryotes,
which include bacteria and archaea, lack membrane-bound nuclei and other organelles, and transcription occurs in
the cytoplasm of the cell. In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, transcription occurs in three main stages: initiation,
elongation, and termination.
Initiation
Transcription requires the DNA double helix to partially unwind in the region of mRNA synthesis. The region of
unwinding is called a transcription bubble. The DNA sequence onto which the proteins and enzymes involved in
transcription bind to initiate the process is called a promoter. In most cases, promoters exist upstream of the genes
they regulate. The specific sequence of a promoter is very important because it determines whether the
corresponding gene is transcribed all of the time, some of the time, or hardly at all (Figure 9.15).
9.3 • Transcription
209
