nucleus is put into an enucleated egg cell, which is
then stimulated to divide and develop into an
organism.
In reverse genetics methods, a gene is mutated or
removed in some way to identify its effect on the
phenotype of the whole organism as a way to
determine its function.
10.2 Biotechnology in Medicine and
Agriculture
Genetic testing is performed to identify disease-
causing genes, and can be used to benefit affected
individuals and their relatives who have not developed
disease symptoms yet. Gene therapy—by which
functioning genes are incorporated into the genomes of
individuals with a non-functioning mutant gene—has
the potential to cure heritable diseases. Transgenic
organisms possess DNA from a different species,
usually generated by molecular cloning techniques.
Vaccines, antibiotics, and hormones are examples of
products obtained by recombinant DNA technology.
Transgenic animals have been created for experimental
purposes and some are used to produce some human
proteins.
Genes are inserted into plants, using plasmids in the
bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens, which infects
plants. Transgenic plants have been created to improve
the characteristics of crop plants—for example, by
giving them insect resistance by inserting a gene for a
bacterial toxin.
10.3 Genomics and Proteomics
Genome mapping is similar to solving a big,
complicated puzzle with pieces of information coming
from laboratories all over the world. Genetic maps
provide an outline for the location of genes within a
genome, and they estimate the distance between
genes and genetic markers on the basis of the
recombination frequency during meiosis. Physical
maps provide detailed information about the physical
distance between the genes. The most detailed
information is available through sequence mapping.
Information from all mapping and sequencing sources
is combined to study an entire genome.
Whole genome sequencing is the latest available
resource to treat genetic diseases. Some doctors are
using whole genome sequencing to save lives.
Genomics has many industrial applications, including
biofuel development, agriculture, pharmaceuticals, and
pollution control.
Imagination is the only barrier to the applicability of
genomics. Genomics is being applied to most fields of
biology; it can be used for personalized medicine,
prediction of disease risks at an individual level, the
study of drug interactions before the conduction of
clinical trials, and the study of microorganisms in the
environment as opposed to the laboratory. It is also
being applied to the generation of new biofuels,
genealogical assessment using mitochondria,
advances in forensic science, and improvements in
agriculture.
Proteomics is the study of the entire set of proteins
expressed by a given type of cell under certain
environmental conditions. In a multicellular organism,
different cell types will have different proteomes, and
these will vary with changes in the environment. Unlike
a genome, a proteome is dynamic and under constant
flux, which makes it more complicated and more useful
than the knowledge of genomes alone.
Visual Connection Questions
1. Figure 10.7 Why was Dolly a Finn-Dorset and not a
Scottish Blackface sheep?
Review Questions
2. In gel electrophoresis of DNA, the different bands in
the final gel form because the DNA molecules
________.
a.
are from different organisms
b.
have different lengths
c.
have different nucleotide compositions
d.
have different genes
3. In the reproductive cloning of an animal, the
genome of the cloned individual comes from
________.
a.
a sperm cell
b.
an egg cell
c.
any gamete cell
d.
a body cell
244
10 • Visual Connection Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
