9.4 Translation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the different steps in protein synthesis
•
Discuss the role of ribosomes in protein synthesis
•
Describe the genetic code and how the nucleotide sequence determines the amino acid and the protein
sequence
The synthesis of proteins is one of a cell’s most energy-consuming metabolic processes. In turn, proteins account
for more mass than any other component of living organisms (with the exception of water), and proteins perform a
wide variety of the functions of a cell. The process of translation, or protein synthesis, involves decoding an mRNA
message into a polypeptide product. Amino acids are covalently strung together in lengths ranging from
approximately 50 amino acids to more than 1,000.
The Protein Synthesis Machinery
In addition to the mRNA template, many other molecules contribute to the process of translation. The composition
of each component may vary across species; for instance, ribosomes may consist of different numbers of ribosomal
RNAs (rRNA) and polypeptides depending on the organism. However, the general structures and functions of the
protein synthesis machinery are comparable from bacteria to human cells. Translation requires the input of an
mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors (Figure 9.19).
FIGURE 9.19 The protein synthesis machinery includes the large and small subunits of the ribosome, mRNA, and tRNA. (credit:
modification of work by NIGMS, NIH)
In E. coli, there are 200,000 ribosomes present in every cell at any given time. A ribosome is a complex
macromolecule composed of structural and catalytic rRNAs, and many distinct polypeptides. In eukaryotes, the
nucleolus is completely specialized for the synthesis and assembly of rRNAs.
Ribosomes are located in the cytoplasm in prokaryotes and in the cytoplasm and endoplasmic reticulum of
eukaryotes. Ribosomes are made up of a large and a small subunit that come together for translation. The small
subunit is responsible for binding the mRNA template, whereas the large subunit sequentially binds tRNAs, a type
of RNA molecule that brings amino acids to the growing chain of the polypeptide. Each mRNA molecule is
simultaneously translated by many ribosomes, all synthesizing protein in the same direction.
Depending on the species, 40 to 60 types of tRNA exist in the cytoplasm. Serving as adaptors, specific tRNAs bind to
sequences on the mRNA template and add the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide chain. Therefore, tRNAs
are the molecules that actually “translate” the language of RNA into the language of proteins. For each tRNA to
function, it must have its specific amino acid bonded to it. In the process of tRNA “charging,” each tRNA molecule is
bonded to its correct amino acid.
212
9 • Molecular Biology
Access for free at openstax.org
