the genetic modification of crops). Biotechnology also has many industrial applications, such as
fermentation, the treatment of oil spills, and the production of biofuels, as well as many
household applications such as the use of enzymes in laundry detergent.
Manipulating Genetic Material
To accomplish the applications described above, biotechnologists must be able to extract,
manipulate, and analyze nucleic acids.
Review of Nucleic Acid Structure
To understand the basic techniques used to work with nucleic acids, remember that nucleic acids
are macromolecules made of nucleotides (a sugar, a phosphate, and a nitrogenous base). The
phosphate groups on these molecules each have a net negative charge. An entire set of DNA
molecules in the nucleus of eukaryotic organisms is called the genome. DNA has two
complementary strands linked by hydrogen bonds between the paired bases.
Unlike DNA in eukaryotic cells, RNA molecules leave the nucleus. Messenger RNA (mRNA) is
analyzed most frequently because it represents the protein-coding genes that are being expressed
in the cell.
Isolation of Nucleic Acids
To study or manipulate nucleic acids, the DNA must first be extracted from cells. Various
techniques are used to extract different types of DNA (Figure 10.2). Most nucleic acid extraction
techniques involve steps to break open the cell, and then the use of enzymatic reactions to
destroy all undesired macromolecules. Cells are broken open using a detergent solution
containing buffering compounds. To prevent degradation and contamination, macromolecules
such as proteins and RNA are inactivated using enzymes. The DNA is then brought out of solution
using alcohol. The resulting DNA, because it is made up of long polymers, forms a gelatinous
mass.
FIGURE 10.2 This diagram shows the basic method used for the extraction of DNA.
RNA is studied to understand gene expression patterns in cells. RNA is naturally very unstable
because enzymes that break down RNA are commonly present in nature. Some are even secreted
by our own skin and are very difficult to inactivate. Similar to DNA extraction, RNA extraction
involves the use of various buffers and enzymes to inactivate other macromolecules and preserve
only the RNA.
224
10 • Biotechnology
Access for free at openstax.org
