Applying Genomics
The introduction of DNA sequencing and whole genome sequencing projects, particularly the Human Genome
Project, has expanded the applicability of DNA sequence information. Genomics is now being used in a wide variety
of fields, such as metagenomics, pharmacogenomics, and mitochondrial genomics. The most commonly known
application of genomics is to understand and find cures for diseases.
Predicting Disease Risk at the Individual Level
Predicting the risk of disease involves screening and identifying currently healthy individuals by genome analysis at
the individual level. Intervention with lifestyle changes and drugs can be recommended before disease onset.
However, this approach is most applicable when the problem arises from a single gene mutation. Such defects only
account for about 5 percent of diseases found in developed countries. Most of the common diseases, such as heart
disease, are multifactorial or polygenic, which refers to a phenotypic characteristic that is determined by two or
more genes, and also environmental factors such as diet. In April 2010, scientists at Stanford University published
the genome analysis of a healthy individual (Stephen Quake, a scientist at Stanford University, who had his genome
sequenced); the analysis predicted his propensity to acquire various diseases. A risk assessment was done to
analyze Quake’s percentage of risk for 55 different medical conditions. A rare genetic mutation was found that
showed him to be at risk for sudden heart attack. He was also predicted to have a 23 percent risk of developing
prostate cancer and a 1.4 percent risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease. The scientists used databases and several
publications to analyze the genomic data. Even though genomic sequencing is becoming more affordable and
analytical tools are becoming more reliable, ethical issues surrounding genomic analysis at a population level
remain to be addressed. For example, could such data be legitimately used to charge more or less for insurance or
to affect credit ratings?
Gene Editing
For thousands of years, humans have engaged in some level of control over genes and heredity regarding the plants
and animals we rely on. The technology now exists to exert that control more directly by precisely altering the DNA
of organisms. The technique is usually referred to as CRISPR, for the portions of DNA it targets: "Clustered Regularly
Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats." In essence, DNA contains repetitive sequences with "spacers" between
them. CRISPR-associated nucleases (known as "Cas") are enzymes that can identify, attach to, and cut the strand at
precise locations. In 2012, Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier developed a method to combine the Cas
nuclease with a synthetically produced "guide RNA" that leads the nuclease to selected locations on the DNA
strand. The discovery revolutionized gene editing. Researchers around the world have used CRISPR to manipulate
the actual DNA of plants, animals, laboratory cell lines, and (in trials) human patients. Doudna and Charpentier were
awarded the Nobel Prize for their work.
Gene editing is so promising because it can be used experimentally to understand disease or organismal limitations,
then be applied to overcome those issues. For example, in a human trial, cancerous cells were removed from a
person, edited to remove their cancerous properties at the DNA level, and reintroduced into the patient so that
those now edited cells could multiply and replace the cancerous ones. Using the person's own cells increases the
likelihood of acceptance and success.
Like other applications of genomics, the prospect of directly editing genes brings up a number of ethical issues. Both
Doudna and Chapentier, as well as many other genetic engineers, support only certain CRISPR applications. And
many governments and other entities place strict guidelines on the uses of the powerful technology.
Genome-wide Association Studies
Since 2005, it has been possible to conduct a type of study called a genome-wide association study, or GWAS. A
GWAS is a method that identifies differences between individuals in single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that
may be involved in causing diseases. The method is particularly suited to diseases that may be affected by one or
many genetic changes throughout the genome. It is very difficult to identify the genes involved in such a disease
using family history information. The GWAS method relies on a genetic database that has been in development since
2002 called the International HapMap Project. The HapMap Project sequenced the genomes of several hundred
individuals from around the world and identified groups of SNPs. The groups include SNPs that are located near to
each other on chromosomes so they tend to stay together through recombination. The fact that the group stays
together means that identifying one marker SNP is all that is needed to identify all the SNPs in the group. There are
10.3 • Genomics and Proteomics
237
